README.md, before:

# Sidekiq::ProcessManager

[![Continuous Integration](https://github.com/bdurand/sidekiq-process_manager/actions/workflows/continuous_integration.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/bdurand/sidekiq-process_manager/actions/workflows/continuous_integration.yml)
[![Maintainability](https://api.codeclimate.com/v1/badges/ed89164d480af0e1442e/maintainability)](https://codeclimate.com/github/bdurand/sidekiq-process_manager/maintainability)
[![Ruby Style Guide](https://img.shields.io/badge/code_style-standard-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/testdouble/standard)

This gem provides a command line script for managing [sidekiq](https://github.com/mperham/sidekiq) processes. It starts up a process that then forks multiple sidekiq processes and manages their life cycle. This is important for large sidekiq installations, since without it on MRI ruby, sidekiq will only use one CPU core. By starting multiple processes you make all cores available.

The sidekiq processes can all be managed by sending signals to the manager process. This process simply forwards the signals on to the child processes, allowing you to control the sidekiq processes as you normally would.

If one of the sidekiq processes exits unexpectedly, the process manager automatically starts a new sidekiq process to replace it.

## Pre-Forking

You can use pre-forking to improve memory utilization on the child sidekiq processes. This is similar to using pre-forking in a web server like puma or unicorn. You application will be pre-loaded by the master process and the child sidekiq processes will utilize the loaded code via copy-on-write memory. The overall effect is that you should be able to run more sidekiq processes in a lower memory footprint.

One issue with pre-forking is that any file descriptors (including network connections) your application has open when it forks will be shared between all the processes. This can lead to race conditions and other problems. To fix it, you must close and reopen all database connections, etc. after the child sidekiq processes have been forked.

To do this, your application will need to add an initializer with calls to `Sidekiq::ProcessManager.after_fork` and `Sidekiq::ProcessManager.before_fork`.

The `before_fork` hook is called on the master process right before it starts forking processes. You can use this to close connections on the master process that you don't need.

The `after_fork` hook is called after a forked sidekiq process has initialized the application. You can use this to re-establish connections so that each process gets it's own streams.

At a minimum, you'll probably want the following hooks to close and re-open the ActiveRecord database connection:

```ruby
Sidekiq::ProcessManager.before_fork do
  ActiveRecord::Base.connection.disconnect!
end

Sidekiq::ProcessManager.after_fork do
  ActiveRecord::Base.connection.reconnect!
end
```

If you're already using a pre-forking web server, you'll need to do most of the same things for sidekiq as well.

## Pre-Booting

If your application can't be pre-forked, you can at least load the gem files and libraries your application depends on instead by specifying a preboot file. This file will be loaded by the master process and any code loaded will be copy-on-write shared with the child processes.

For a Rails application, you would normally want to preboot the `config/boot.rb` file.

## Memory Bloat

You can also specify a maximum memory footprint that you want to allow for each child process. You can use this feature to automatically guard against poorly designed workers that bloat the Ruby memory heap. Note that you can also use an external process monitor to kill processes with memory bloat; the process manager will restart any process regardless of how it exits.

## Usage

Install the gem in your sidekiq process and run it with `bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager` or, if you use [bundle binstubs](https://bundler.io/man/bundle-binstubs.1.html), `bin/sidekiq-process-manager`. Command line arguments are passed through to `sidekiq`. If you want to supply on of the `sidekiq-process_manager` specific options, those options should come first and the `sidekiq` options should appear after a `--` flag

```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager -C config/sidekiq.yml
```

or


```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager --no-prefork -- -C config/sidekiq.yml
```

You can specify the number of sidekiq processes to run with the `--processes` argument or with the `SIDEKIQ_PROCESSES` environment variable. The default number of processes is 1.

```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager --processes 4
```

or

```bash
SIDEKIQ_PROCESSES=4 bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager
```

You can turn pre-forking on or off with the --prefork or --no-prefork flag. You can also specify to turn on pre-forking with the `SIDEKIQ_PREFORK` environment variable.

```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager --processes 4 --prefork
```

or

```bash
SIDEKIQ_PREFORK=1 SIDEKIQ_PROCESSES=4 bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager
```

You can turn pre-booting on with the `--preboot` argument or with the `SIDEKIQ_PREBOOT` environment variable.

```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager --processes 4 --preboot config/boot.rb
```

or

```bash
SIDEKIQ_PREBOOT=config/boot.rb SIDEKIQ_PROCESSES=4 bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager
```

You can set the maximum memory allowed per sidekiq process with the `--max-memory` argument or with the `SIDEKIQ_MAX_MEMORY` environment variable. You can suffix the value with "m" to specify megabytes or "g" to specify gigabytes.

```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager --processes 4 --max-memory 2g
```

or

```bash
SIDEKIQ_MAX_MEMORY=2000m SIDEKIQ_PROCESSES=4 bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager
```

## Alternatives

Any process manager can be an alternative (service, update, systemd, monit, god, etc.).

The advantages this gem can provide are:

1. Pre-forking can be useful on systems with many cores but not enough memory to run enough sidekiq processes to use them all.

2. Running in the foreground with output going to standard out instead of as daemon can integrate better into containerized environments.

3. Built with sidekiq in mind so signal passing is consistent with signals used when running a simple sidekiq process.

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem "sidekiq-process_manager", require: false
```

Then execute:
```bash
$ bundle
```

Or install it yourself as:
```bash
$ gem install sidekiq-process_manager
```

## Contributing

Open a pull request on [GitHub](https://github.com/bdurand/sidekiq-process_manager).

Please use the [standardrb](https://github.com/testdouble/standard) syntax and lint your code with `standardrb --fix` before submitting.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

Commit message:

add support for measuring linux process shared memory

README.md, after:

# Sidekiq::ProcessManager

[![Continuous Integration](https://github.com/bdurand/sidekiq-process_manager/actions/workflows/continuous_integration.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/bdurand/sidekiq-process_manager/actions/workflows/continuous_integration.yml)
[![Maintainability](https://api.codeclimate.com/v1/badges/ed89164d480af0e1442e/maintainability)](https://codeclimate.com/github/bdurand/sidekiq-process_manager/maintainability)
[![Ruby Style Guide](https://img.shields.io/badge/code_style-standard-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/testdouble/standard)

This gem provides a command line script for managing [sidekiq](https://github.com/mperham/sidekiq) processes. It starts up a process that then forks multiple sidekiq processes and manages their life cycle. This is important for large sidekiq installations, since without it on MRI ruby, sidekiq will only use one CPU core. By starting multiple processes you make all cores available.

The sidekiq processes can all be managed by sending signals to the manager process. This process simply forwards the signals on to the child processes, allowing you to control the sidekiq processes as you normally would.

If one of the sidekiq processes exits unexpectedly, the process manager automatically starts a new sidekiq process to replace it.

## Pre-Forking

You can use pre-forking to improve memory utilization on the child sidekiq processes. This is similar to using pre-forking in a web server like puma or unicorn. You application will be pre-loaded by the master process and the child sidekiq processes will utilize the loaded code via copy-on-write memory. The overall effect is that you should be able to run more sidekiq processes in a lower memory footprint.

One issue with pre-forking is that any file descriptors (including network connections) your application has open when it forks will be shared between all the processes. This can lead to race conditions and other problems. To fix it, you must close and reopen all database connections, etc. after the child sidekiq processes have been forked.

To do this, your application will need to add an initializer with calls to `Sidekiq::ProcessManager.after_fork` and `Sidekiq::ProcessManager.before_fork`.

The `before_fork` hook is called on the master process right before it starts forking processes. You can use this to close connections on the master process that you don't need.

The `after_fork` hook is called after a forked sidekiq process has initialized the application. You can use this to re-establish connections so that each process gets it's own streams.

At a minimum, you'll probably want the following hooks to close and re-open the ActiveRecord database connection:

```ruby
Sidekiq::ProcessManager.before_fork do
  ActiveRecord::Base.connection.disconnect!
end

Sidekiq::ProcessManager.after_fork do
  ActiveRecord::Base.connection.reconnect!
end
```

If you're already using a pre-forking web server, you'll need to do most of the same things for sidekiq as well.

## Pre-Booting

If your application can't be pre-forked, you can at least load the gem files and libraries your application depends on instead by specifying a preboot file. This file will be loaded by the master process and any code loaded will be copy-on-write shared with the child processes.

For a Rails application, you would normally want to preboot the `config/boot.rb` file.

## Memory Bloat

You can also specify a maximum memory footprint that you want to allow for each child process. You can use this feature to automatically guard against poorly designed workers that bloat the Ruby memory heap. Note that you can also use an external process monitor to kill processes with memory bloat; the process manager will restart any process regardless of how it exits.

You can also specify how to measure process memory on a Linux system depending on how you want to treat shared memory.

- rss - measure resident memory usage ([resident set size](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resident_set_size))
- uss - measure only private (non-shared) memory ([unique set size](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unique_set_size))
- pss - measure shared memory proportionally for all processes sharing it ([proportional set size](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proportional_set_size))

The default is to measure resident memory. Non-Linux systems will always measure resident memory.

## Usage

Install the gem in your sidekiq process and run it with `bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager` or, if you use [bundle binstubs](https://bundler.io/man/bundle-binstubs.1.html), `bin/sidekiq-process-manager`. Command line arguments are passed through to `sidekiq`. If you want to supply on of the `sidekiq-process_manager` specific options, those options should come first and the `sidekiq` options should appear after a `--` flag

```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager -C config/sidekiq.yml
```

or


```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager --no-prefork -- -C config/sidekiq.yml
```

You can specify the number of sidekiq processes to run with the `--processes` argument or with the `SIDEKIQ_PROCESSES` environment variable. The default number of processes is 1.

```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager --processes 4
```

or

```bash
SIDEKIQ_PROCESSES=4 bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager
```

You can turn pre-forking on or off with the --prefork or --no-prefork flag. You can also specify to turn on pre-forking with the `SIDEKIQ_PREFORK` environment variable.

```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager --processes 4 --prefork
```

or

```bash
SIDEKIQ_PREFORK=1 SIDEKIQ_PROCESSES=4 bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager
```

You can turn pre-booting on with the `--preboot` argument or with the `SIDEKIQ_PREBOOT` environment variable.

```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager --processes 4 --preboot config/boot.rb
```

or

```bash
SIDEKIQ_PREBOOT=config/boot.rb SIDEKIQ_PROCESSES=4 bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager
```

You can set the maximum memory allowed per sidekiq process with the `--max-memory` argument or with the `SIDEKIQ_MAX_MEMORY` environment variable. You can suffix the value with "m" to specify megabytes or "g" to specify gigabytes. You can specify the method for measuring process memory on Linux with `--memory-measurement` or the `SIDEKIQ_MEMORY_MEASUREMENT` environment variable.

```bash
bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager --processes 4 --max-memory 2g --memory-measurement rss
```

or

```bash
SIDEKIQ_MAX_MEMORY=2000m SIDEKIQ_MEMORY_MEASUREMENT=rss SIDEKIQ_PROCESSES=4 bundle exec sidekiq-process-manager
```

## Alternatives

Any process manager can be an alternative (service, update, systemd, monit, god, etc.).

The advantages this gem can provide are:

1. Pre-forking can be useful on systems with many cores but not enough memory to run enough sidekiq processes to use them all.

2. Running in the foreground with output going to standard out instead of as daemon can integrate better into containerized environments.

3. Built with sidekiq in mind so signal passing is consistent with signals used when running a simple sidekiq process.

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem "sidekiq-process_manager", require: false
```

Then execute:
```bash
$ bundle
```

Or install it yourself as:
```bash
$ gem install sidekiq-process_manager
```

## Contributing

Open a pull request on [GitHub](https://github.com/bdurand/sidekiq-process_manager).

Please use the [standardrb](https://github.com/testdouble/standard) syntax and lint your code with `standardrb --fix` before submitting.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
